Citation Nr: 22013867
Decision Date: 03/10/22	Archive Date: 03/10/22

DOCKET NO. 15-42 245
DATE: March 10, 2022

ORDER

Service connection for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) with emphysema is denied.

Service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is denied.

Service connection for residuals of skin cancer is denied.

Service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is denied.

REMANDED

Service connection for a heart disorder, to include ischemic heart disease (IHD), is remanded.

Service connection for a vascular disorder is remanded.

Service connection for vertigo (also claimed as dizziness and Meniere's disease) is remanded.

Service connection for a skin condition, other than skin cancer, is remanded.

Service connection for a psychiatric disorder, other than PTSD, is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence is not in approximate balance, but persuasively against a finding that the Veteran served in the Republic of Vietnam or that he was otherwise exposed to herbicide agents, such as Agent Orange.

2. The Veteran had active service at Camp Lejeune from September 1963 to June 1964; therefore, he is presumed to have been exposed to contaminants in the water supply during that time.

3. The evidence is not in approximate balance, but persuasively against a finding, that the Veteran's COPD with emphysema began during or is related to his active service.

4. The evidence is not in approximate balance, but persuasively against a finding, that the Veteran's OSA began during or is related to his active service.

5. The evidence is not in approximate balance, but persuasively against a finding, that the Veteran's skin cancer began during or is related to his active service 

6. The evidence is not in approximate balance, but persuasively against a finding, that the Veteran's PTSD began during or is related to his active service.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for COPD with emphysema have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.307(a)(7).

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for OSA have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.307(a)(7).

3. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for skin cancer have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.307(a)(7).

4. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for PTSD have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.304, 3.307(a)(7)

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from May 1960 to June 1964.  

These matters come to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a from a January 2014 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  

These claims were previously remanded by the Board in November 2017 and March 2019.

In November 2017, the Board directed the RO to make additional attempts to obtain classified records from the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA).  The Board also instructed the RO to conduct any necessary development regarding the Veteran's assertions that his disabilities are related to exposure to toxins while serving at Camp Lejeune, North Carolina.  Finally, the Board directed the RO to obtain an opinion regarding whether the Veteran's vertigo was aggravated by his service-connected hearing loss and tinnitus, which was accomplished in October 2018.

In March 2019, the Board again remanded these matters because the RO failed to attempt to obtain classified records from the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA).  The record contains an October 2019 response from the CIA that they were unable to confirm the Veteran's presence in Vietnam.  Additionally, the Board found that opinions regarding whether any of the Veteran's disabilities were due to exposure to contaminants in the water supply at Camp Lejeune were warranted; opinions regarding whether the Veteran's claimed disabilities were due to exposure to herbicide agents, such as Agent Orange, were only warranted if service in Vietnam was conceded.  As Vietnam service was not conceded, opinions were obtained (which consider his presumed exposure to contaminants in the water supply at Camp Lejeune) in June 2020, November 2020, and January 2021.  The Board also instructed the RO to obtain outstanding VA treatment records and associate them with the claims file, to contact the Veteran and request that he provide authorizations for any records he wished VA to obtain, and to attempt to obtain any identified records upon receipt of an authorization.  Outstanding VA treatment records were associated with the claims file in March 2021, simultaneously with the issuance of the March 2021 Supplemental Statement of the Case.  The RO also obtained outstanding private records for which the Veteran submitted valid authorizations. 

The Board finds that actions requested in the prior remands have been undertaken, that there has been substantial compliance with its prior remand instructions, and therefore, that no further action is necessary.  See D'Aries v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 97 (2008) (holding that only substantial, and not strict, compliance with the terms of a Board remand is required pursuant to Stegall v. West, 11 Vet. App. 268 (1998)).

The Board notes that the RO requested the Veteran submit any relevant private treatment records or submit information with which VA can assist the Veteran in obtaining private treatment records. VA requested records for which the Veteran submitted a proper release. The duty to assist is not a one way street.  If a veteran desires help, he cannot passively wait for it in those circumstances where he may or should have information that is essential in obtaining evidence.  Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190 (1991). Thus, the Board finds that VA has satisfied the duty to assist.  No further notice or assistance to the Veteran is required to fulfill VA's duty to assist in development.  Smith v. Gober, 14 Vet. App. 227 (2000); Dela Cruz v. Principi, 15 Vet. App. 143 (2001); Quartuccio v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 183 (2002).

The Veteran testified at a May 2017 Board hearing before a Veterans Law Judge (VLJ) who has since retired.  In May 2021, he was offered the opportunity to testify at a new hearing before a VLJ who would decide his case and he and his spouse testified at a November 2021 hearing before the undersigned VLJ.  Transcripts of both hearings are associated with the evidence of record and have been considered.

Although all the evidence of record has been thoroughly reviewed, only the most relevant and salient evidence is discussed below.  See Gonzales v. West, 218 F.3d 1378 (Fed. Cir. 2000).  The analysis in this decision focuses on what the evidence shows or fails to show with respect to the matters decided herein.  The Veteran should not assume that pieces of evidence not explicitly discussed herein have been overlooked.  See Allday v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 517, 527 (1995).

Service Connection

Legal Criteria

Service connection may be established for disability due to a disease or injury that was incurred in or aggravated by active military service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  Service connection may also be granted for any disease initially diagnosed after service, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d). 

In general, in order to prevail on the issue of service connection the evidence must show: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004). 

Veterans who had active service in the Republic of Vietnam from January 9, 1962, to May 7, 1975, are presumed to have been exposed to herbicide agents, such as Agent Orange.  38 U.S.C. § 3.307(a)(6)(iii). 

Veterans who had no less than 30 days (consecutive or nonconsecutive) service at Camp Lejeune from the period beginning on August 1, 1953, and ending on December 31, 1987, shall be presumed to have been exposed to contaminates in the water supply.   38 U.S.C. § 3.307(a)(7)(iii).  "Contaminants in the water supply" means the volatile organic compounds trichloroethylene (TCE), perchloroethylene (PCE), benzene, and vinyl chloride, that were in the on-base water-supply systems at Camp LeJeune during the aforementioned dates.  38 U.S.C. § 3.307(a)(7)(i).  

Factual Background and Analysis

The Veteran is claiming he has COPD with emphysema, OSA, and skin cancer, which he believes are the result of exposure to herbicide agents, such as Agent Orange, while stationed in Vietnam and/or Japan.  He has claimed he served in Vietnam in the early 1960s.  See, e.g., November 2013 Statement.  He is also claiming these disabilities are the result of exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune.

The Veteran's DD-214 reflects he had one year, two months, and twenty seven days of "foreign and/or sea service" and three months and twelve days of "other service."   His military occupational specialty (MOS) was a field bugler; he received the Expert Badge, Rifle, M-14.

Personnel records indicate he departed San Diego, California aboard the USS Paul Revere (APA 248) in June 1962 and arrived in Okinawa in July 1962.  An October 28, 1962, roster reflects the Veteran was assigned to temporary additional duty (TAD) while stationed at Camp Hansen in Okinawa, and an associated unit diary indicates he arrived at Numazu Beach in Japan on November 5, 1962.  A subsequent unit diary indicates that on December 11, 1962, the Veteran departed Numazu Beach and arrived at White Beach in Okinawa on December 14, 1962.  Service personnel records also reflect that in July 1963, he embarked onboard the USNS Gaffey from Japan and arrived in San Diego in August 1963.  Thereafter, he was stationed at Camp Lejeune from September 1963 to June 1964.

Given the Veteran's service at Camp Lejeune from September 1963 to December 1964, he is presumed to have been exposed to contaminates in the water supply.   See 38 U.S.C. § 3.307(a)(7)(iii).

The Veteran has submitted several statements and testified at several hearings before the RO and the Board that he had service in the Republic of Vietnam.  Specifically, he has indicated that he was recruited by the CIA to perform clandestine operations in South Vietnam because he was an expert marksman.  See, e.g., Correspondence Received in January 2014.  He indicated he was recruited by the CIA to assist the South Vietnamese with weapons training, that his primary duty was marksmanship instructor, and that at times he was called on to be a sniper.  See id.  However, his statements have been inconsistent.  

In Statements in Support of a Claim for PTSD dated March 2012 and December 2013, he identified two specific stressors which took place between November 1962 and January 1963 while he claims he was stationed in Vietnam.  He indicated that he was trapped in an observation post foxhole for four days with very limited water and food because a company of Viet Cong got in between him and his camp.  He further stated that another time he was leaning against a tree smoking a cigarette with his elbow on the tree and his head in his palm and that a Viet Cong sniper took a shot at him, which went through the triangle formed by his head, tree, and elbow, and missed his head by only a few inches.

Interestingly, at a September 2012 VA knee examination, he indicated he injured his knee playing volleyball in 1962 and was on a profile for this disability until his discharge in 1964.  He also informed the provider that he spent three days in the hospital for a probable contusion but had no fractures and no surgery.  His service treatment records reflect that he twisted his right ankle while playing volleyball on November 21, 1962; x-rays were within normal limits and there were no fractures.  There is no indication he was hospitalized.  Rather, a November 25, 1962, service treatment record indicates he was wearing a right ankle cast and was placed on light duty for 21 days; his cast was removed on December 17, 1962.

In one of his statements received in January 2014, he indicated he was stationed in the northern part of South Vietnam approximately two miles from the DMZ.  He further indicated that after his tour of duty in Vietnam he returned to Camp Hansen in Okinawa and then was sent to Camp Lejeune to complete his active service.

In his May 2014 Notice of Disagreement, the Veteran stated that although his records do not document service in Vietnam, they do reflect a period of authorized absence of three months and twelve days which are not reflected in his leave record, and that this was the time he spent in Vietnam.  However, a review of the Veteran's enlistment contract and record reflects he had inactive service from February 19, 1960, to May 30, 1960, for a total of three months and twelve days.  This inactive service preceded his active service (and is listed on his Form DD-214 as "other service") and does not demonstrate he served in Vietnam.

In a May 2014 statement, the Veteran indicated he was part of Operation Sunrise, and was sent to a village approximately ten miles south of the DMZ, and that these villages were called "strategic hamlets."

In November 2014 correspondence, the Veteran indicated he attached a letter from the CIA regarding his service on the ground in Vietnam with the CIA from November 962 to January 1963; however, no such letter was attached.  Rather, he submitted declassified reports from the CIA.  These reports discuss a "Rural Reconstruction Campaign" in South Vietnam, initiated by their government.  These documents discuss that soldiers were covertly placed in strategic hamlets in Vietnam under Operation Sunrise during the time the Veteran claims to have been stationed in Vietnam.  He further submitted documents regarding black entry tactics where the CIA trained and dropped teams in North Korea as well as CIA operations including political action, intelligence, and pacification programs in South Vietnam.  While these declassified CIA reports reflect soldiers were placed in covert operations during the time the Veteran was stationed in Okinawa, they do not demonstrate that he was actually in Vietnam with the CIA.

At his June 2015 Decision Review Officer (DRO) hearing, the Veteran stated he was flown into Saigon by Air America and then helicoptered to Quang Tri, Vietnam, to the village where he served.  In a December 2015 VA Form 9, the Veteran's prior representative argued that VA failed to consider the transport ship logs which demonstrate the Veteran was transported to Vietnam.  In a September 2016 letter to his Congressman, the Veteran claimed his service records had been altered and that he was on a ship that dropped him in Saigon.  

At his March 2017 hearing before the Board, he testified that he was stationed in Okinawa for thirteen months; at one point he went to Japan (the Board assumes he meant the mainland of Japan) for cold weather training, then back to Okinawa, then to Vietnam.  He also testified that he was transported from Okinawa to Vietnam via Air America and was dropped at Saigon then helicoptered to a small village just south of the DMZ where he was for three months.

In a September 2017 statement from his former representative, the representative indicated the Veteran served a tour in Vietnam in 1964 in a clandestine operation headed by the CIA, that he served as a sniper and also taught Vietnamese villages how to use weapons, and that he lived among the villagers with no other American troops or CIA agents stationed with him.

An August 2019 document in the record reflects that the CIA does not release records to any third party, i.e., VA, and that VA would only receive a confirmation of yes or no.  In September 2019, VA sent the Veteran a Special Operations Questionnaire and asked him to complete and return the form; the Veteran did not respond to that specific Questionnaire but did submit statements regarding his claimed Vietnam service.  In one September 2019 statement, he indicated that he attached a letter from the CIA confirming his service from November 1962 to January 1963; however, there is no such letter attached.  In September 2019, VA also received from the Veteran declassified CIA documents and a map of Vietnam; however, this evidence does not demonstrate he served there.  An October 2019 notation in the file indicates that the CIA informed VA they were unable to confirm the Veteran's presence in Vietnam.

At his November 2020 examinations, he informed the examiner he was exposed to Agent Orange while stationed in Korea.

At the Veteran's November 2021 hearing before the Board, he testified that he believed he was exposed to herbicide agents, such as Agent Orange, by way of, in part, contaminated water.  He indicated that he remembered seeing drums while stationed in Okinawa of what he believed were Agent Orange because of the orange color/stripes on the drums.  He testified that he served in Vietnam and stated that while in the field he could see airplanes distributing this chemical on trees and that by virtue of walking in the jungle he would see white spots on his skin which left tiny scars.  The Veteran reported that "they were spraying a mile wide on each side of the Mekong River" to eliminate places for the Northern Vietnamese to hide.

Initially, the Board finds the evidence is not in approximate balance, but persuasively against a finding that the Veteran served in Vietnam.  As noted, the Board does not find him credible due to inconsistencies which weigh against a finding he was actually in Vietnam.  While there is evidence in the record by way of declassified CIA documents that there were covert operations being performed in Vietnam in the early 1960s, the Board does not find the Veteran credible due to, in part, to inconsistencies in his statements.

First, more often than not, he has claimed he was in Vietnam for a clandestine operation with the CIA from November 1962 to January 1963; however, service personnel records clearly document his presence aboard a ship that traveled to the mainland of Japan for operations training during that time.  Additionally, more often than not, he has claimed he was flown by Air America to Saigon and then was transported via helicopter to a small village in the northern part of South Vietnam near the DMZ.  However, in the midst of his appeal, he has also claimed that he was transported to Saigon by ship.  Moreover, he testified at his November 2021 hearing that "they were spraying a mile wide on each side of the Mekong River" to eliminate places for the Northern Vietnamese to hide; however, the Board takes notice that the Mekong River is well over 100 mile west of Quang Tri, the village he claimed he was stationed at.  The Veteran never claimed he was transported by vehicle or air to anywhere near the Mekong River; rather, he has claimed his duties involved teaching the Quang Tri villagers how to use weapons, set up strategic hamlets, and serve as a sniper.  

However, the most egregious inconsistency is that at his September 2019 knee examination, he indicated that he injured his knee in November 1962, was hospitalized for three days due to a possible contusion, and that he was on a physical profile for the rest of his active service due to his knee.  As discussed above, service treatment records document that he injured his ankle, not his knee, in November 1962 and do not reflect any hospitalizations in connection with that injury.  He was placed on a physical profile for his ankle until December 12, 1962, during the same time he has claimed he was serving in Vietnam alone, without other soldiers or CIA agents, as a marksman instructor and as a sniper.  Throughout the record he has claimed he was chosen for this secret CIA mission because of his expert marksmanship and because he was a country boy who was familiar with navigating the jungle.  The Board finds that given the Veteran's right ankle sprain that it would have been inconsistent with this service that he would have been sent on a clandestine mission (while still on a profile through the middle of December), without any other soldiers or CIA agents, to work, in part, as a sniper navigating the jungle and without ensuring he had adequate medical attention and care.  Further, to the extent the Veteran has claimed he was sent alone to Vietnam from November 1962 to January 1963, the record reflects he sought medical treatment on January 3, 1963, for folliculitis after shaving.  If he was actually in Vietnam alone without any soldiers or CIA agents, the Board finds it is perplexing that he would be receiving this documented military healthcare.  

Lastly, oddly, at his November 2020 VA heart examination, he and his wife stated he served in Korea.  At his November 2020 VA respiratory examination, he informed the provider he was exposed to Agent Orange while stationed in Korea for 18 months.  This is the first time he has claimed he served in Korea and his service personnel records reflect no such service.

Here, the Board finds the Veteran's statements regarding his claimed service in Vietnam are not credible as they are inconsistent and not facially plausible.  See Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498, 510-511 (1995) (credibility can be generally evaluated by a showing of interest, bias, or inconsistent statements, and the demeanor of the witness, facial plausibility of the testimony, and the consistency of the testimony).   To the extent the Veteran and/or his representative may argue that VA did not adequately develop the Veteran's claim with the CIA, the Board has found him not credible and finds no such further development is needed.

Moreover, the Board also finds the evidence is not in approximate balance, but persuasively against a finding, that the Veteran was exposed to herbicide agents, such as Agent Orange, while stationed in Japan.  As discussed, the Board does not find the Veteran credible due to inconsistencies in his statements.  Curiously, the first time he claimed direct exposure to herbicide agents, such as Agent Orange, while stationed in Japan was at his November 2021 hearing, after VA failed to concede his presence in Vietnam several times.  To the extent the Veteran claims he saw drums with orange stripes on them in Japan, the Board does not find this demonstrates herbicide agents, such as Agent Orange, were actually used there.   While he is competent to report things he has witnessed based on personal observation, such as seeing drums which he believed were filled with Agent Orange, he is not competent to report that they actually contained a specific substance, as he does not possess the education, training, and experience to do so.  VA has not conceded any such herbicide use in Japan and the Veteran's statements alone, which have been found not to be credible, do not trigger VA's duty to assist in developing this assertion further.

Similarly, no such further development regarding the Veteran's claim that he was in Korea is necessary. The Board acknowledges that even if the Veteran was stationed in Korea, as he mentioned at his November 2020 examinations, it would not have been during any period where herbicide agents, such as Agent Orange, were presumptively used near the Korean DMZ.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.307(a)(6)(iv).  Further, the Board does not find the Veteran is credible given his inconsistent statements and there is no evidence in his service personnel records that he was in Korea.

The evidence is not in approximate balance, but persuasively against a finding that the Veteran was actually or presumptively exposed to herbicide agents in Vietnam, Japan, or Korea. The Board has considered the Veteran's contentions; however, they are outweighed by the official record, which fails to document any actual or presumptive exposure. 

Accordingly, the Board will proceed to adjudicate the Veteran's claims and consider whether any of his disabilities are related to service, to include as due to exposure to contaminants in the water at Camp Lejeune.

1. Service connection for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) with emphysema

The Veteran is claiming service connection for COPD and emphysema.   At his June 2015 DRO Hearing, he testified that he first noticed respiratory symptoms "probably thirty years ago or longer."  At his November 2021 Board hearing, he testified that he had experienced COPD symptoms since active service.

At a November 2020 VA respiratory examination, the examiner diagnosed COPD and indicated in the "Remarks" section "COPD . . . is an overarching term that can include many different diseases of the lungs which includes emphysema."   Regarding medical history, the Veteran stated he started having shortness of breath and trouble walking distances about 35 years prior.  However, his spouse indicated she believed he first sought trouble for his breathing problems in 1974 with a local provider to manage his symptoms; the Veteran reported at that time he had a pulmonary function test and was diagnosed with COPD and severe emphysema.  Thereafter, he stated he was placed on oxygen at night and given a sleep study.  

The examiner found no nexus between the Veteran's COPD with emphysema and his active service, reasoning that the Veteran's condition did not develop until decades after service, the Veteran had an extensive history of tobacco use, COPD is caused by long-term exposure to lung irritants that damage the lungs/airways, and that in the United States the most common irritant that causes COPD is cigarette smoke.  The examiner also indicated that medical literature did not support a finding that COPD results from exposure to Agent Orange (even though this has not been conceded).

In a separate November 2020 medical opinion, the same examiner explained that exposure to contaminated water or pesticides would not cause, among other disabilities, COPD.

There are no conflicting medical opinions, and the examiner provided a rationale for the negative opinions.  Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the evidence is not in approximate balance, but persuasively against a finding that service connection for COPD with emphysema is warranted; therefore, the claim must be denied.

2. Service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA)

The Veteran is claiming service connection for OSA.  

At his March 2017 hearing, the Veteran's wife indicated that he snored and that he had lost most of his nose due to "mole surgery."  She did not indicate the onset of his snoring but did report he currently used a continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) machine and a nebulizer.

A private August 2009 pulmonary and sleep medicine report reflects the Veteran presented with symptoms of snoring and worsening fatigue; a sleep study confirmed a diagnosis of moderate OSA.

The record contains a November 2020 negative opinion finding no nexus between the Veteran's active service and his OSA.  The examiner considered the Veteran's lay statements, medical records, and a physical examination and reasoned that the Veteran had an extensive history of tobacco use in addition to a medical history of obesity, hypertension, atherosclerosis, hyperlipidemia, diabetes mellitus, type II, and COPD.  The examiner explained that OSA is a problem with breathing pauses during sleep which occurs because of narrowed or blocked airways and also noted that there are several risk factors associated with an increased risk of developing sleep apnea including, in part, a large neck, obesity, or large tonsils/adenoids or tongue that could block the airway.  The examiner cited to medical literature demonstrating that consideration had been given to exposure to toxins in the water supply at Camp Lejeune and exposure to herbicide agents, such as Agent Orange (even though the latter has not been conceded).

In a separate November 2020 medical opinion, the same examiner explained that exposure to contaminated water or pesticides would not cause, among other disabilities, the Veteran's OSA, and cited to the same aforementioned medical articles.

There are no conflicting medical opinions, and the examiner provided a rationale for the negative opinions.  Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the evidence is not in approximate balance, but persuasively against a finding that service connection for OSA is warranted; therefore, the claim must be denied.

3. Service connection for skin cancer

The Veteran is claiming service connection for skin cancer and has also alleged he has other skin conditions.  Service connection for skin conditions other than skin cancer is discussed in the remand portion below.

At the November 2021 hearing before the Board, the Veteran's spouse indicated that he had been diagnosed with basal cell carcinoma on his nose and underwent surgery.  She also stated that he has several other areas of his body treated for skin conditions, including his "upper area," shoulders, and back.

At a November 2020 VA examination, the examiner noted the Veteran had right and left forearm dorsal scars (the result of 2013 residuals of squamous cell carcinoma) and bridge of nose and bilateral nares scars (the result of 2017 residuals basal cell carcinoma.

The record contains a November 2020 opinion which found no nexus between the Veteran's active service and his basal cell carcinoma and other skin cancers, reasoning that these are the result of cumulative sun exposure and that any skin cancer diagnosis is not related to any previous diagnoses as each episode (lesion) is separate and not related to previous episodes (it does not spread).  The examiner noted that exposure to herbicide agents, such as Agent Orange, does not cause skin cancer (even though the Board has not conceded such exposure).  In a separate November 2020 medical opinion, the same examiner explained that exposure contaminated water or pesticides would not cause, among other disabilities, skin cancer, and cited to medical literature.

There are no conflicting medical opinions, and the examiner provided a rationale for the negative opinions.  Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the evidence is not in approximate balance, but persuasively against a finding that service connection for residuals of skin cancer is warranted; therefore, the claim must be denied.

4. Service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)

The Veteran is claiming service connection for PTSD.   VA treatment records document a diagnosis of PTSD.

As discussed above, the Veteran has identified two specific stressors which took place between November 1962 and January 1963 while he claims he was stationed in Vietnam.  See, e.g., March 2012 and December 2013 Statements in Support of a Claim for PTSD.  He indicated that he was trapped in an observation post foxhole for four days with very limited water and food because a company of Viet Cong got in between him and his camp.  He further stated that another time he was leaning against a tree smoking a cigarette with his elbow on the tree and his head in his palm and that a Viet Cong sniper took a shot at him, which went through the triangle formed by his head, tree, and elbow, and missed his head by only a few inches.  At his November 2021 hearing and in various other statements he also indicated the general carnage of war (seeing dead bodies, small arms attacks, etc.) caused his PTSD.

Service connection for PTSD requires medical evidence diagnosing the condition in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 4.125(a); a link, established by medical evidence, between current symptoms and an in-service stressor; and credible supporting evidence that the claimed in-service stressor occurred.  38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f).

The Board acknowledges that the record contains a positive November 2020 opinion, finding that the Veteran's diagnosed PTSD was related to his claimed in-service stressors.  A subsequent January 2021 opinion acknowledging that the Veteran did not serve in Vietnam indicates that the Veteran did not offer any other stressor events not related to his service that could be used in meeting the DSM-5 diagnostic criteria for establishing PTSD.  However, as discussed in detail above, the Board finds that there is not credible supporting evidence that the Veteran's claimed in-service stressors occurred, as there is no competent and credible evidence he served in Vietnam.  See, e.g., 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f).

In denying the claim for PTSD, the Board acknowledges that the record contains other mental health diagnoses (e.g. anxiety and depression).  The Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) has held that a claim for service connection for one mental health disorder, e.g. PTSD, encompasses a claim for all diagnosed mental health disorders.  Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 7 (2009).  Consideration for service connection for a psychiatric disorder other than PTSD is discussed in the remand portion of this decision.  

Additional Considerations

In sum, there are no records for several decades after service suggesting any complaints or diagnoses for the Veteran's claimed conditions. See Maxson v. Gober, 230 F.3d 1330, 1333 (Fed. Cir. 2000) (holding that a prolonged period without medical complaint can be considered, along with other factors concerning a claimant's health and medical treatment during and after military service, as evidence of whether an injury or a disease was incurred in service which resulted in any chronic or persistent disability); see also Mense v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 354 (1991) (holding that VA did not err in denying service connection when the Veteran had failed to provide evidence demonstrating continuity of symptomatology and had failed to account for the lengthy time period following his service during which there was no clinical documentation of the claimed disorder).  There are no probative opinions (i.e., clinical opinions based on review of pertinent records) that the evidence is in approximate balance that the Veteran's claimed conditions are related to service.  

The Board recognizes that the Veteran and his spouse may sincerely believe that his claimed disabilities are the result of his service.  While they are competent to report things they witness or experience through personal knowledge, they have not shown they possess the medical experience, training, and expertise to opine on the medical issues at hand.  Although lay persons are competent to provide opinions on some medical issues, the Board finds that a lay person is not competent to provide a probative opinion as to the specific issues in this case in light of the education and training necessary to make a finding with regard to the complexities of the claims for COPD with emphysema, OSA, skin cancer, or PTSD. See Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428, 435 (2011); see Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Service connection for a heart disorder, to include ischemic heart disease (IHD)

The Veteran has claimed service connection for IHD, and this claim is considered one for all diagnosed heart disorders.  See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 7 (2009).

Initially, the Board notes that IHD and coronary artery disease (CAD) refer to the same heart condition and may be used interchangeably.  See U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, Public Health, Ischemic Heart Disease and Agent Orange: https://www.publichealth.va.gov/exposures/agentorange/conditions/ischemicheartdisease.asp (last accessed February 24, 2022) ("[IHD] is also known as [CAD] or 'hardening of the arteries.'"); see also Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Coronary Artery Disease: https://www.cdc.gov/heartdisease/coronary_ad.htm (last accessed February 24, 2022) ("[CAD] is sometimes called coronary heart disease or [IHD].").

At his hearing before the Board the Veteran testified his IHD was diagnosed in approximately 2006, and that he believes is due to exposure to herbicide agents, such as Agent Orange.

At a November 2020 VA heart examination, the examiner provided diagnoses of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease with pacemaker placement (diagnosed in 2004), atrial fibrillation status-post percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) (diagnosed in 2006), cardiomyopathy (diagnosed in 2008), and CAD (diagnosed in 2008). 

The record contains a November 2020 opinion finding a positive relationship between the Veteran's IHD and his active service, which was predicated on he and his wife's statements that he was exposed to Agent Orange.  As discussed above at length, the Board has not conceded this.   Accordingly, a new opinion is required to determine whether the Veteran's IHD began during or is etiologically related to his active duty service, without consideration that he was exposed to herbicide agents, such as Agent Orange, but with consideration of whether it began during or is related to service, including due to exposure to contaminants in the water supply at Camp Lejeune.

The record also contains a negative opinion finding the Veteran's other heart conditions were not related to his active service; however, this opinion suggests that IHD can be associated with his atrial fibrillation, suggesting that secondary service-connection may be warranted.  Further, if service connection is granted for IHD, given that he has other heart diagnoses, the Board finds opinions on secondary service-connection would be warranted.

2. Service connection for a vascular disorder

The Veteran is claiming service connection for a vascular disorder.  Records reflect he had a history of abdominal aortic aneurysm repair in 2006, thoracic aneurysm repair in 2010, and popliteal aneurysm repair with stent placement in 2014.  See 

At his November 2020 examination, the Veteran denied symptoms of peripheral vascular disease since undergoing weight loss surgery and popliteal aneurysm repair, and the examiner found no current diagnosis of a vascular disorder.  However, with regard to the prior history of peripheral vascular disease, the examiner provided a negative opinion which acknowledged that peripheral vascular disease "is associated with," among other diseases, CAD.

Given that service connection for IHD/CAD is being remanded herein, and because the evidence suggests that Veteran's history of peripheral vascular disease may be secondary to his CAD, these issues are inextricably intertwined and must be remanded together so they may be decided simultaneously.  

3. Service connection for vertigo

The Veteran is claiming service connection for vertigo on a direct basis and as secondary to his service-connected hearing loss and tinnitus.

At the Veteran's hearing, his wife indicated that the Veteran was diagnosed with Meniere's disease within the last five years; prior to that, the diagnosis was non-positional vertigo.  The Veteran reported exposure to noise during service and denied using hearing protection during service and reported he was a sniper.  

A November 2015 VA ear conditions examination notes a diagnosis of Meniere's syndrome; the vestibular/ear focused examination was overall normal except for an abnormal Romberg test (a test that measures a sense of balance).  The examiner provided an opinion finding the Veteran's Meniere's disease consists of a constellation of symptoms (including hearing loss) and that one does not cause the other.  

An October 2018 opinion found that the Veteran's vertigo was not aggravated by his hearing loss and tinnitus, explaining that his vertigo and its clinical course is as expected with individuals who have Meniere's disease and, therefore, there is no aggravation due to his service-connected tinnitus. 

The Veteran attended a November 2020 VA ear conditions examination.  The examiner was unable to diagnose a current or chronic ear condition based on a normal ear examination.  The examiner acknowledged the Veteran had been diagnosed with Meniere's disease in 2015 with a history of benign positional vertigo.  The examiner found the Veteran's complaints of dizziness were not related to service and were more likely related to medications he takes for his heart conditions, further reasoning that the Veteran's intermittent vertigo began decades after service.  

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds a new examination and opinion are warranted.  First, clarification regarding whether the Veteran has (or has had throughout the appeal period) a diagnosis of Meniere's disease is required.  Second, the November 2020 opinion regarding direct service connection does not explicitly discuss exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune and whether this is related to any vertigo or Meniere's disease.  Third, the November 2015 opinion regarding secondary service connection only considers causation with regarding to hearing loss and does not discuss his service-connected tinnitus.  Finally, the October 2018 opinion regarding secondary service connection on the basis of aggravation merely indicates that vertigo is a symptom of Meniere's disease, and therefore, it cannot be aggravated by his hearing loss or tinnitus; this opinion is incomplete and the rationale is confusing, particularly given the discrepancy in diagnoses.

Accordingly, an examination and new opinions are required.

4. Service connection for a psychiatric disorder other than PTSD

The record contains diagnoses of major depressive disorder, anxiety, unspecified trauma related disorder (rule out PTSD), and adjustment disorder.  See, e.g., January 2019 and February 2019 VA Psychiatry Notes.

The Veteran has reported a change in his behavior since he returned from active duty and indicated he was depressed and anxious.  See, e.g., June 2013 VA Mental Health Consultation.  In November 2014, VA received a letter from the Veteran's nephew which indicates that after the Veteran was discharged from service in 1964 that his behavior had changed; his nephew reported that upon his return from active service, the Veteran became hypervigilant and was nervous/jittery around loud noises or fireworks.  

The Court has held that there is a low threshold for when VA is required to obtain an examination or opinion in claims for service connection; if the evidence "indicates" that there "may" be a nexus between a current disability and a claimant's service, then an examination and opinion is required.  See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 84 (2006).  Based on the foregoing, the Board finds a remand is required to obtain an examination and opinions regarding the mental health diagnoses of record.

5.  Service connection for a skin condition, other than skin cancer

The Veteran has claimed he has skin conditions which began during and have continued since service.  The Veteran testified at his November 2021 hearing that he has several white spots (hyperpigmented spots on his skin) which he first noticed while serving overseas.  

Private treatment records from Pinehurst Medical Center reflect impressions of actinic keratoses, seborrheic dermatitis, and neoplasms of uncertain behavior.

As the prior skin examination failed to consider skin disorders other than skin cancer (or scars relating to cancer or other surgery), the Board finds a remand is required for a new examination and opinions.

The Veteran and his representative have the right to submit additional evidence and argument on the matters the Board has remanded.  See Kutscherousky v. West, 12 Vet. App. 369 (1999). 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum opinions regarding the etiology of the Veteran's heart disorders and history of vascular disease. 

The clinician is informed of the following:

	The Veteran was not exposed to herbicide agents, such as Agent Orange, during service.

	The Veteran is presumed to have been exposed to contaminants in the water supply at Camp Lejeune from December 27, 1963, to June 4, 1964.  

	An opinion finding a nexus to service (or to a service-connected disability) does not require certainty.  Rather, if the evidence is in approximate balance, both for and against a nexus, the clinician should make a finding in favor of the Veteran.  

Following a review of the record, the clinician should provide the following opinions:

(a)	Is the Veteran's IHD related to service, to include as due to exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune?  Why or why not?

(b)	Did the Veteran's IHD manifest within one year of separation from active duty service (by June 1965)?  Why or why not?

(c)	If either (a) or (b) is in the affirmative, determine:

i.	Did the Veteran's IHD cause any of his other heart disorders (atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease with pacemaker placement; atrial fibrillation status-post PC, or cardiomyopathy)?  Why or why not?

ii.	Did the Veteran's IHD aggravate any of his other heart disorders (atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease with pacemaker placement; atrial fibrillation status-post PC, or cardiomyopathy)?  Why or why not?

iii.	Is the Veteran's peripheral vascular disease caused by his IHD?  Why or why not? 

iv.	Is the Veteran's peripheral vascular disease aggravated by his IHD?  Why or why not?

A complete rationale for each opinion is required.  Citation to accepted medical literature and/or principles would be of great assistance to the Board.  If the clinician cannot provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, he or she must explain why this is so.

2. Afford the Veteran the appropriate examination to determine the etiology of any vertigo (or diagnoses with vertigo as a symptom).  All appropriate diagnostic tests must be performed.  The examiner must obtain from the Veteran and record in the examination report a complete history regarding the onset and continuity of symptoms.

Following a review of the evidence of record, and with consideration of the Veteran's statements, provide the following opinions:

(a)	Document all diagnoses at any point throughout the record regarding the Veteran's symptoms of dizziness, to include, but not limited to:

i.	Meniere's disease, and

ii.	Benign positional vertigo.

If the examiner finds a previous diagnosis was rendered in error, or that a current diagnosis represents a progression of a previous diagnosis, a complete explanation must be provided.  

If the examiner finds no diagnosis to explain the Veteran's vertigo, an opinion for (b) through (d) must be rendered nonetheless considering his claimed symptoms of dizziness.

(b)	With regard to each diagnosis in (a), determine whether the condition is related to the Veteran's active duty service, to include as due to exposure to contaminants in the water supply Camp Lejeune.  Why or why not?

(c)	With regard to each diagnosis in (a), determine whether the Veteran's hearing loss and tinnitus caused the diagnosis.  Why or why not? 

(d)	With regard to each diagnosis in (a), determine whether the Veteran's hearing loss and tinnitus aggravated the diagnosis.  Why or why not? 

The examiner is informed of the following:

	The Veteran was exposed to acoustic trauma during service.

	A positive opinion finding a nexus to service, or a service-connected disability, does not require certainty.  Rather, if the evidence is in approximate balance both for and against the claim, the examiner should render an opinion favorable to the Veteran.

A complete rationale for each opinion is required.  Citation to accepted medical literature and principles would be of great assistance to the Board.  If the examiner is unable to provide any opinion without resorting to speculation, he or she must explain why this is so.

3. Afford the Veteran an examination to determine the etiology of all psychiatric disorders (other than PTSD).  All appropriate diagnostic tests must be performed.  The examiner must obtain from the Veteran and record in the examination report a complete history regarding the onset and continuity of symptoms.

Following a review of the record and with consideration of the Veteran's statements, provide the following opinions:

(a)	Document all psychiatric diagnoses on examination and in the record (other than PTSD), to include, but not limited to:

i.	Depression;

ii.	Anxiety;

iii.	Adjustment disorder; and 

iv.	Unspecified Trauma Disorder

If the examiner finds any previous diagnosis was rendered in error, or that a current diagnosis represents a progression of a previous diagnosis, a complete explanation must be provided.  

(b)	With regard to each diagnosis in (a), determine whether the psychiatric disorder began during or is related to service.  Why or why not?

The examiner is informed of the following:

	The Veteran's claimed service in Vietnam has not been conceded; the examiner may not consider any of the Veteran's statements in this regard.

	A positive opinion finding a nexus to service does not require certainty.  Rather, if the evidence is in approximate balance both for and against the claim, the examiner should render an opinion favorable to the Veteran.

A complete rationale for each opinion is required.  If the examiner is unable to provide any opinion without resorting to speculation, he or she must explain why this is so.

4. Afford the Veteran the appropriate examination to determine the etiology of all skin conditions (other than skin cancer).  The examiner should obtain from the Veteran and document in the examination report a complete history regarding the onset and continuity of symptoms.

The clinician is informed of the following:

	The Veteran was not exposed to herbicide agents, such as Agent Orange, during service.

	The Veteran is presumed to have been exposed to contaminants in the water supply at Camp Lejeune from December 27, 1963, to June 4, 1964.  

	An opinion finding a nexus to service, or to a service-connected disability, does not require certainty.  Rather, if the evidence is in approximate balance, both for and against a nexus, the clinician should make a finding in favor of the Veteran.  

Following a review of the record, the clinician should provide the following information:

(a)	Identify all skin disorders other than skin cancer found on examination and in the record, to include, but not limited to: (i) actinic keratoses, (ii) seborrheic dermatitis, and (iii) neoplasms of uncertain behavior.

(b)	With respect to each skin disorder identified in (a), determine whether it began or is related to the Veteran's active duty service, to include as due to exposure to contaminants in the water supply at Camp Lejeune.  Why or why not?

A complete rationale for each opinion is required. Citation to accepted medical literature and principles would be of great assistance to the Board.  If the examiner is unable to provide any opinion without resorting to speculation, he or she must explain why this is so.

 

 

Jennifer White

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	O'Connell, Jessica L.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303. 
